##04 Current Digital Environment

###Types of Online Services

Individual LAs may be required to deliver over 700 different
services[^2] although not all of these are available
online. Depending on the size and type of LA, and the extent of channel
shift already achieved, the number of online services offered by the LAs
participating in this review generally ranged between 50 and 200.

Many of these online services consist of simple web interactions such as
finding out about bin collection day or downloading pdf documents which
do not require any level of personal identification. Around half of
online services offered are considered to be transactional and carry
greater necessity for citizen IdA.

Transactional processes can vary in that some may be completed
immediately (e.g. paying council tax, reporting that a bin has not been
collected), some may be saved and returned to over a period of time
(e.g. completing a 38 page form for housing benefit/council tax
benefit), and others may involve an initial submission that initiates a
process which includes offline steps (e.g. posting proof of car
ownership for resident parking permit).

###Single Sign-on as an Enabler for Improved Customer Experience

The majority of authorities are either currently offering (in part) or
are developing their ideas on a holistic approach to citizen identity.
For example through the concepts of a single customer account, a virtual
service centre, a single view of the citizen or establishment of the
‘golden record’[^3]. A number of authorities also
spoke of wanting to be able to offer their citizens an ‘Amazon style’
experience where information and services can be targeted to individuals
based upon their history of interactions and/or profile characteristics.
The common feature of these is an easy to use customer experience built
around a single sign-on and access to a range of products and services.

No full and comprehensive example where a single sign-on IdA mechanism
enables delivery of this improved customer experience was identified in
this review. Common aims though are around improving the customer
experience, for example by being able to save form-entry data for later
completion, sign up for alerts, review history and track progress of
transactions, pre-populate personal information such as address, date of
birth, phone numbers etc. and importantly to remove the need for
citizens to repeatedly register, authenticate themselves and enter the
same data many times.

###Assisted Digital for Identity Assurance

Authorities are driving forward the channel shift from analogue to
digital interactions to reduce the volumes of face to face (F2F) and
telephone interactions, making citizens more able to help themselves.

Whilst ‘Digital by Default’ has become a commonly accepted aspiration
which extends to the inclusion of mobile devices and telephony
technology (such as Interactive Voice Response) and is generally
associated with a culture of self-service, it is also recognised that
there is still a need to maintain alternative access routes for some
citizens.

> “…a major thrust for the programme is identifying who our universal
customers are, providing a fit for purpose self-serve digitally enabled
proposition but not at the exclusion of those target customer groups
that may need something different. That something different might be
digitally enabled because we might be able to provide that in a mediated
way; it may be that the targeted groups are isolated individuals that
digital services can really enhance their access to council services and
other life experiences.”

Tracy Dodds, Insight & Design Manager, Bristol City Council

Thus through mediated access, digital technology may still provide
enhanced services for those unable to self-serve online but this will
need to apply equally to the provision of any online IdA service.

###Identity Assurance and Multi-Channel Transactions

It is understood that for some transactions, F2F or telephony will
continue to be the optimal channels. This may be as much to do with the
nature of the transaction as with citizens’ abilities to self-serve. As
previously mentioned in Section 4.1, some transactions may not only
consist of multiple steps but may also be conducted over multiple
channels (e.g. use smartphone to access and set up a transaction,
continue the transaction on home computer, engage with some advisers via
telephone/F2F for assistance as part of that same transaction). A key
consideration therefore for citizen IdA lies around managing
transactions to the same level of assurance throughout the process.
Channels and modes of interaction mentioned in this context include:

-   Face to face

    -   council offices/one stop shops

    -   in-home visits

-   Post

-   Telephone

    -   interactive voice response

    -   mediated telephone

-   Digital

    -   Devices

        -   fixed device (pc/laptop)

        -   mobile device (smartphone, tablet)

        -   digital television

        -   kiosks

    -   Technologies

        -   internet

        -   digital interactive television

        -   apps

        -   email

        -   SMS.
