##06 Citizen Attitude to Identity Assurance


###Customer Concerns

Although many authorities do have citizen panels and hold regular
forums, the subject of IdA and/or related procedures has not yet been
raised as a topic of discussion. However some feedback has been received
which illustrates concerns about data privacy and loss and the apparent
inability of LAs to share across departments.

Some level of irritation has been reported around the need to register
and log in to undertake simple transactions but this has been addressed
in at least one case by changing the registration from being mandatory
to optional.

###Impact of Identity Assurance Process on Take-up

However none of this has been shown to have an impact on take-up of a
digital service.

Process design issues can of course affect take-up. The online voting
pilot run in Rushmoor District in 2007 was highlighted as an example of
this. In the intervening years between the 2003 and 2007 pilots, the
authentication process was changed to include the need for a ‘wet
signature’[^4] and a citizen selected username being
entered into a database on behalf of the citizen by council staff. This
did not in and of itself cause an issue. A negative impact however may
have resulted from incorrect entry of data by council staff as well as
from the electors forgetting the username they had sent in to the
council[^5]. In 2007, only 57% of those registering
to vote online successfully did so.

Some indications that procedures need not present a barrier to channel
shift however come from an online housing benefit application and a
parking permit renewal service, both of which require presentation of
additional validation evidence such as recent payslips, tenancy
agreement, recent bank statements or evidence of National Insurance
number. Online take-up in both cases is in excess of 70%.

###Moving to a Federated Approach – Citizen Trust

When considering the implications of a federated provider approach it
was felt that citizens would need to feel able to trust the identity
providers, and organisations such as the Post Office or credit unions
might be more readily accepted within localities where citizens are used
to interacting with them on a regular basis (use of demographic analyses
could help to identify which providers would be most accepted by a
community). Another question it was suggested that citizens might raise
was around why 3^rd^ parties have to be involved at all and how citizen
information might be used.

It was therefore felt important that:

-   there should be clear communication of the benefits and the
    rationale behind why 3^rd^ parties rather than government should
    provide online identities when government holds a lot of this data
    already

-   identity providers are clearly seen to be certified by government

-   a national brand that can be trusted by citizens is developed or
    associated to the identity provision

-   there should be citizen consultations around trust and data sharing
    and the role of 3^rd^ party identity providers

-   there should be clear communications around what provision of an
    identity from a 3^rd^ party will and will not achieve.

Communication is seen as key and it was suggested that a national
campaign run by trusted organizations (e.g. Citizen’s Advice Bureau and
other voluntary organizations) would be helpful.

Communications to build citizen trust and highlight the benefits such as
a reduction in bureaucracy for both citizens and the LA, are seen as
key. Once a proven nationally recognised approach is in place with a
recognised and trusted branding, it is suggested that the branding could
then be integrated into LA websites. LAs would then feel more confident
about communicating the concept at the local level. Through a variety of
channels awareness raising could be undertaken. Suggested approaches
include citizen training in libraries and other venues with high citizen
footfall, contact through third sector and voluntary organizations,
articles in free newspapers and council magazines, promotions through
the housing advice bus visits and web promotion.

Another important step for LAs is to gain a sound understanding through
customer research on how the idea of federated IdA might be received by
different sectors of the population[^6]. Usability
and accessibility are also a key concern to ensure that processes are
not over-complicated – it may be more appealing to undertake repeated
simple registrations and sign-ons than one complicated procedure
especially when the goal is to undertake a simple transaction.

