##07 Identity Assurance Status Local Authority

###Drivers for Online Identity Assurance

Whilst there is some mention of a national agenda, the most common
drivers for online citizen IdA are cited as corporate strategy, service
needs, cost reduction and efficiencies. Although there has been no
explicit demand from citizens (other than around privacy concerns),
improvement of the customer experience also appears to be a motivating
factor.

In response to these drivers authorities have strategies either in place
or in development to take forward service transformation, channel shift
and/or improved customer service. Key principles of these strategies
include digital by default (or at least by citizen preference),
escalation of a self-service culture allowing greater focus on the more
vulnerable, multiple channel access, and device independence.

IdA is not always discretely identified within these strategies although
a number of authorities articulated its importance in terms of being an
architectural building block and an enabler. Business cases do not tend
to be written for IdA but rather it is included as an element within
business cases for channel shift/service improvement programmes (e.g.
Individual Electoral Registration Programme). So whilst it may not be
explicitly referenced, there was general consensus that IdA is an
important part of the infrastructure and is an integral part of channel
shift which will allow a more coherent approach to the citizen.

The developing theme of single sign-on and a standardized approach to
IdA is however juxtaposed with emerging imperatives. The advent of adult
social care budgeting, and new government policies on troubled families
is likely to drive LAs to seek further single service solutions to add
to the mix.

> “… because of the need to respond to welfare reform the view was that
we can’t wait so we’ll do it and then fix it, federate it later.”

Lee Hemsworth, Chief Officer (Intelligence and Improvement), Leeds City
Council

###Approaches to Requirements Definitions

Different approaches have been taken to assess assurance requirements.
Formal approaches using standard methods such as Privacy Impact
Assessments, Risk Assessments, Risk Management and Accreditation
Documentation Set (RMADS) have been taken but other less formal
approaches have also been followed.

A number of LAs are now in the process of investigating or reviewing the
market place for a more generic IdA solution whilst others are still at
early stages of working through their requirements. For most however,
there is a concern not to adopt a solution that will not meet future
needs and could result in having to re-engineer the solution at some
later date.

> “We would have loved to move off our proprietary authentication
solution years ago but identifying how we could do that in a way that
wasn’t going to take us down another blind alley was very difficult to
do.”

Ian Litton, Information & Innovation Manager, Warwickshire County Council

> “We need the benefit of common standards and shared solutions rather
than local authorities and other government agencies continuing to
re-invent wheels.”

Stuart Campbell, Assistant Director Performance & Improvement , Hertfordshire County Council

> “We don’t want to be in the position where we go down the road of doing
the work and we’re not compliant with other things.”

Kevin Woodcock, ICT Programme Manager, East Riding of Yorkshire Council

> “There’s a danger that in the absence of anything authoritative people
may interpret in a hundred different ways and arguably I’d rather comply
with an agreed national framework of best practice than conceive one
however well intentioned on my own, so not reinventing the wheel in this
day and age sounds very sensible to me.”

David McIlroy, Head of Business Change and ICT,Trafford Council

###Collaboration and Pilot Work

LA collaborative work around online citizen IdA appears to be mainly
within the context of the Microsoft Shared Learning Group and the data
matching pilots for the Electoral Registration Transformation Programme
(ERTP).

However IdA is a topic of ongoing dialogue between LAs and with
organizations such as Socitm and the Association of Greater Manchester
Authorities (AGMA).

Consideration of a local approach to online citizen IdA however has
generally been informed through research of IdA mechanisms available on
the market or working with a business partner. Some authorities are
aware of the IdA Programme and are therefore expecting to include
information from that programme in their deliberations. Most authorities
however are still in the process of investigating/assessing an optimal
solution.

Considerations mentioned for citizen IdA include:

-   An identity service solution should be Open Standards based (e.g.
    OpenID)

-   The local authority or some other partner may undertake the role of
    Issuing Authority

-   Future integration of social care self-directed support (personal
    budgets) will involve a high level of assurance

-   Linking with personal data stores

-   Linking across borders with other councils (district, borough,
    county etc)

-   Joining up with other public sector services (e.g. DWP, NHS)

-   Transferability of identity(e.g. moving in from another borough)

-   Linking with Facebook, Hotmail accounts etc. for authentication

-   Multiple device assurance processes (PC/laptop, mobile devices,
    telephony etc.)

###Local Authority Awareness and Readiness

Those who participated in the interviews are naturally informed about
the topic of online IdA for citizens however this awareness and
understanding does not permeate uniformly throughout organizations.

Whilst security and risk may be something that is at the forefront of
the minds of those working in LAs (especially at times of newsworthy
data losses), awareness and understanding of citizen IdA is described as
‘partial’ or ‘mixed’. In general awareness and understanding of the
impact (e.g. process change implications) may exist at some higher
levels such as cabinet members, especially those who are portfolio
holders, and senior managers. Awareness in other areas may be high where
IdA is an essential principle (e.g. ICT, health and children related
services).

This is a work in progress and some LAs are in the process of discussing
IdA needs with business managers. In the past, online IdA mechanisms and
processes may have been viewed as a technical issue. This has resulted
in the knowledge around the processes of citizen IdA being an emerging
intelligence, especially in relation to the association of a single
customer view that is supported by internal data such as a master
customer index.

Despite an incomplete level of awareness and understanding there were no
concerns reported around capacity, capability or resources that would be
needed to progress with online citizen IdA. It was felt that these were
either already in place or that they would be addressed as a matter of
course e.g. as part of agreeing a business case.

LAs are embarking on different facets of online citizen IdA at different
paces and it is therefore difficult to generalize about a state of
readiness to move towards adoption of a standardized approach. When
asked for their opinions, around one third reported that they felt their
organizations are ready to move towards implementing comprehensive
online IdA whilst others felt that they still have ‘a way to go’. The
kind of work undertaken by LAs to date includes (but is not limited to):

-   Strategic positions clarified

-   High level planning underway

-   Review of consumer market for identity provision and solutions
    identified

-   Implementation of online IdA to level 0/1 for Highways services

-   Operational use of authentication servers capable of handling SAML
    assertions (i.e. federation capability in place)

-   Module development for online benefits service

-   Mobile technology framework in place forming part of information
    security policy

-   Data matching pilots.

Examples of the kind of work that some of the LAs plan to undertake over
the next 3 months include:

-   Development of specification for overarching IdA system

-   Review of online services and specification of levels of assurance

-   Review of consumer market for identity provision and procurement of
    a solution

-   Development of a system to test integration with Google login
    authentication

-   Trialing and evaluation of IdA software

-   Business case development of a Client Index taking account of and
    collaborating with the IdA Programme.

Examples of the kind of work that some of the LAs plan to undertake over
the next 12 months include:

-   Implementation of IdA systems for personalized budgets

-   Implementation of IdA system linking at least two services with
    mechanism in place to link others and replacement of current
    authentication

-   Implementation of personalized delivery of services

-   Consumption of GDS products enabling acceptance of greater levels of
    trust.

###Potential for Experience Sharing

There are some examples of fundamental processes being put in place to
align with a more all embracing approach to online citizen IdA (e.g. in
Newham an identifier is automatically printed on documentation that is
posted to home addresses, thereby providing one of the factors needed
for online authentication), and some of the approaches taken in grouping
service access have demonstrated the effectiveness of a single sign-on.

None of the LAs participating in this review was at a stage of having
implemented a standardised solution for online citizen IdA. It is worth
noting however that although not part of this review, The London Borough
of Harrow does provide a mechanism using the Gandlake Citizen’s Account
software to access a number of online services (council tax, business
rates, rents, libraries) that will allow citizens to eventually access
over 80 of their online services using a single sign-on.

There are nevertheless some useful materials and products that can be
shared now and in the coming months that could help support other
authorities as they progress with their IdA plans and provision of a
platform to accommodate sharing of knowledge and understanding could be
a catalyst for accelerating nationwide progress in citizen online IdA.


