##11 Recommendations

There is a strong sense of enthusiasm for securing wider understanding
of HMG’s plans around citizen IdA. LAs are keen to identify whether, how
and when their plans may be aligned to a national approach and to
minimise any risk of future isolation. Additionally, an excellent
potential opportunity for effective re-use of centrally developed
standards and technology is recognised.

To help LAs in moving forward, the following recommendations are made:

###1. Provide assistance to LAs 

so that they may align with the IdAP vision:

-   Publish IdAP vision and strategy at earliest opportunity

-   Publish IdAP deliverables roadmap and timeline

-   Enable LAs to utilise HMG procurement framework.

Publishing and effectively disseminating the vision and strategy along
with the deliverables roadmap will provide LAs with clarity on GDS
technology and approach and aid them in formulating their own plans.

Whilst LA procurement frameworks exist for a number of software
application solutions, there does not appear to be any such framework
that would apply to procurement of IdA services.

###2. Work nationally with all suppliers 

including LA suppliers to:

-   Review the landscape of IdA provision

-   Promote the national perspective.

A review of LA service providers for example to clarify which suppliers
will only offer their own proprietary service for IdA, which are open
standards based and may therefore present no interoperability issues,
whether individual suppliers are offering a consistent product/service
across their customer base, would provide information to enable useful
engagement with those suppliers.

Engaging service providers will also help influence negotiations and
reduce the risk of LAs being ‘boxed in’ by embedded suppliers (i.e.
those suppliers from whom software systems such as online council tax
are purchased).

###3.  Publish a common set of features & standards for IdA 

such as a minimum feature list. Build on good practice guides such as the Requirements for Secure Delivery of Online Public Services(RSDOPS).

A common set of features would also help to clarify relationships
between Levels of Assurance (0-3, Bronze – Gold etc.), factor
authentication, and generally develop a common language that will
minimize misunderstandings.

###4.  Engage with LAs to pilot federated IdA solutions

and further explore current non-federated approaches.

Many LAs are keen to collaborate to help develop and test federated
solutions in their local environment. It would also be instructive to
explore alternative non-federated approaches that have already been
taken by some LAs such as Harrow to online citizen IdA

###5.  Widen lines of communications to LAs 

Through:

-   Knowledge sharing platform

-   Newsletters

-   Social media (e.g. blogs, tweets).

There is a sharp appetite to share, learn, collaborate, inform and be
informed. Additionally awareness-raising across the public sector would
help address some of the barriers and issues facing authorities in
relation to increasing understanding of the concerns within LAs and
partner organizations, help to clarify thinking around potential
solutions and increase efficiencies through avoidance of ‘re-inventing
the wheel’.

###6.  Develop good practice guidelines 

for implementing assisted digital for IdA

###7.  Customer insight research 

is required to:

-   Investigate user attitudes to and perceptions of trust, data sharing
    and the role of 3rd party identity providers

-   Usability/accessibility studies should be undertaken and good
    practice for IdA defined and published

-   Develop a communications plan and national campaign to raise citizen
    awareness and trust.

###8.  Develop a national brand for federated IdA

to encourage citizens to trust the new approach.

